.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Southern Storm Software, Pty Ltd.
.\"
.\" This file is part of the libjit library.
.\"
.\" The libjit library is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License
.\" as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 2.1 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The libjit library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
.\" License along with the libjit library.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH libjit 3 "18 April 2004" "Southern Storm Software" "Just-In-Time Compiler Library"
.SH NAME
libjit \- Just-In-Time Compiler Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <jit/jit.h>

Link with
.B -ljit
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBlibjit\fR library has an extensive set of routines that takes care
of the bulk of the Just-In-Time compilation process, without tying the
programmer down with language or bytecode specifics.

Unlike other systems such as the JVM, .NET, Parrot, and LLVM, \fBlibjit\fR
is not a virtual machine in its own right.  It is the foundation upon which a
number of different virtual machines, dynamic scripting languages, etc,
can be built.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Written by Southern Storm Software, Pty Ltd.

http://www.southern-storm.com.au/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B libjit
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B libjit
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info libjit
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
